# huffman-compressor

Badly written code produced out of curiosity. Has a near 50% compression ratio with the example lorem ipsum file.

# how it works

## encoding

The code first reads the file `to_encode.txt`, counting the amount of times each character appears in the document. Next, it generates a dictionary of Nodes. A Node in this context is simply a data structure containing: the character/word, its frequency value, and the left & right Nodes. The program then builds a tree by performing this algorithm: loop through the dictionary; for every iteration, merge two of words of which have the smallest quantity values, creating a new Node with the two merged Nodes as its leaf values. By merging, the two merged Nodes are deleted and replaced with the new Node.

After the tree is created, the letter-to-code map is generated by recursively traversing through the Nodes and recording the paths taken. Once a leaf Node is hit, the path (the code itself) and the Node's symbol are then recorded and stored in the map. Once that is complete, the program will trivially substitute each character of the text it plans to encode to their corresponding codes using a simple dictionary lookup of the aforementioned letter-to-code map. The resulting string is a series of "1"s and "0"s. This string must then be converted into a series of bytes, which can be done trivially using python's `int(..., 2)` function and iterating through every 8 characters of the string, taking an 8-long substring each time. Since the encoded string will not always be a multiple of 8, a padding of zeroes by the end of the string must be added to ensure that.

## storage

The data itself is stored within the file `data.bin`. To maximise compression, a raw binary file is used, although the metadata is stored as a JSON file with the name of `metadata.json`. The metadata file contains necessary information to unencode the binary file, such as the tree structure and the padding length.

## unecoding

The process of unencoding is as trivial as traversing through the tree using the string of bits stored in the binary file. Prior to that, the metadata and data files are read by the program, with the metadata JSON being parsed to obtain the tree and padding. During the unencoding process, when the program has reached the final byte, it must take into account the padding bytes and not decode them.

